Nom du Fichier :

kessler94715

Titre :

Extraction of terminology in the field of construction

Auteurs :

1st Remy´ Kessler 2nd Nicolas Bechet´ 3rd Giuseppe Berio Universite´ Bretagne Sud Universite´ Bretagne Sud Universite´ Bretagne SudCNRS 6074A CNRS 6074A CNRS 6074A          56017 Vannes,France 56017 Vannes,France 56017 Vannes,France     

Courriels :

remy.kessler@univ-ubs.fr
nicolas.bechet@irisa.fr
giuseppe.berio@univ-ubs.fr

Abstract :

Index Terms—terminology extraction, Internet queries, linguis- tic patterns.I. INTRODUCTIONThe current era is increasingly influencedby the prominence of smart data and mobile applications. The work presented in this paper has been carried out in one industrial project (VOCAGEN) aiming at automating the production of struc- tured data from human machine dialogues. Specifically, the targeted application drives dialogues with people working in a construction area for populating a database reporting key data extracted from those dialogues. This application requires complex processing for both transcripting speeches but also for driving dialogues. The firstprocess is required for good speech recognition in a noisy environment. The second processing is required because the database needs to be populated with both right and complete data; indeed, people tend to apply a broad (colloquial) vocabulary and the transcripted words need to be used for fillingin the corresponding data. Additionally, if some data populate the database, additional data may be required for completeness, thus the dialogue should enable to get those additional data (e.g. if the word ”room” is recognised and used to populate the database, the location of the room must also be got; this can be done by driving the dialogue).The application provides people with “hand-free” device, enabling a complete, quick and standardized reporting. First usages of this application will be oriented to reporting failures and problems in constructions.The two processing steps mentioned above require on the one side a “language model” (for transcripting the sentences) and on the other side a “knowledge model” for driving thedialogue and correctly understanding the meaning of the word. The knowledge model is mainly an ontology of the domain (in this case, the construction domain) providing the standardized concepts and their relationships. As well-known, building such knowledge models needs time and is costly; one of the earlier questions raised by our industrial partners has been about “how to build, as automaticaly as possible, such a knowledge model”. This question is closely related to the interest of quickly adapting the application to other domains (than the construction one) for reaching new markets. We developed a complete methodology and system for partially answering the question, focusing on how to extract a relevant terminology from a collection of technical specifications.The rest of the paper is organized as follow. Section II present context of the project. Related work are reviewed in Section III. Section IV presents collected resources and some statistics about them. Section V describes the methodology de- veloped for extracting relevant terms from collected resources. The details about the evaluation are presented in Section VI-A and results obtained, are given in Section VI-B.II. INDUSTRIAL CONTEXTFigure 1 presents the context of this work in VOCA- GEN project. Our industrial partner Script&Go1 develop anapplication for the construction management dedicated to touch devices and wishes to set up an oral dialogue module to facilitate on construction site seizure. The second industrial partner (Tykomz) develops a vocal recognition suite based on toolkit sphynx 4 [1]. This toolkit includes hierarchical agglom- erative clustering methods using well-known measures such as BIC and CLR and provides elementary tools, such as segment and cluster generators, decoder and model trainers. Fitting those elementary tools together is an easy way of developing a specific diarization system. To work, it is necessary to build a model of knowledge, i.e. a model describing the expressions that must be recognized by the program. To improve the performance of the system, this knowledge model must be1http://www.scriptandgo.com/en/

Bibliographie :


