
Evaluation Only. Created with Aspose.Words. Copyright 2003-2023 Aspose Pty Ltd.
On the Development of the RST Spanish Treebank 

Created with an evaluation copy of Aspose.Words. To discover the full versions of our APIs please visit: https://products.aspose.com/words/

Iria da Cunha             Institute for Applied       Linguistics (UPF), Spain Instituto de Ingeniería      (UNAM), Mexico         Laboratoire Informatique d’Avignon (UAPV), France 
Juan-Manuel Torres-Moreno Laboratoire Informatique d’Avignon (UAPV), France 
Instituto de Ingeniería (UNAM), Mexico 
École Polytechnique de Montréal, Canada 
Gerardo Sierra
Instituto de Ingeniería (UNAM), Mexico 
gsierram@iingen.unam.
mx 

Created with an evaluation copy of Aspose.Words. To discover the full versions of our APIs please visit: https://products.aspose.com/words/

iria.dacunha@upf.edu  juan-manuel.torres@univ-
avignon.fr 

Created with an evaluation copy of Aspose.Words. To discover the full versions of our APIs please visit: https://products.aspose.com/words/

Abstract 
In this article we present the RST Spanish Treebank,  the  first  corpus  annotated  with rhetorical  relations  for  this  language.  We describe  the  characteristics of the corpus, the  annotation  criteria,  the  annotation procedure,  the  inter-annotator  agreement, and  other  related  aspects.  Moreover,  we show the interface that we have developed to  carry  out  searches  over  the  corpus’ annotated texts. 
1  Introduction 
The Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) (Mann and Thompson, 1988) is a language independent theory based on the idea that a text can be segmented into Elementary  Discourse  Units  (EDUs)  linked  by means  of  nucleus-satellite  or  multinuclear rhetorical relations. In the first case, the satellite gives additional information about the other one, the  nucleus,  on  which  it  depends  (ex.  Result, Condition,  Elaboration  or  Concession).  In  the second  case,  several  elements,  all  nuclei,  are connected at the same level, that is, there are no elements dependent on others and they all have the same importance with regard to the intentions of the author of the text (ex. Contrast, List, Joint or Sequence).  The  rhetorical  analysis  of  a  text  by means  of  RST  includes  3  phases:  segmentation, detection of relations and building of hierarchical rhetorical trees. For more information about RST we  recommend  the  original  article  of  Mann  and 
Thompson (1988), the web site of RST Proceedings of the Fifth Law Workshop (LAW V), pages 1–10,
Portland, Oregon, 23-24 June 2011. c 2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
 and the RST review by Taboada and Mann (2006a). 
RST  has  been  used  to  develop  several applications,  like  automatic  summarization, information  extraction  (IE),  text  generation, question-answering,  automatic  translation,  etc. (Taboada and Mann, 2006b). Nevertheless, most of these  works  have  been  developed  for  English, German or Portuguese. This is due to the fact that at present corpora annotated with RST relations are available  only  for  these  languages  (for  English: Carlson et al., 2002, Taboada and Renkema, 2008; for German: Stede, 2004; for Portuguese: Pardo et al., 2008) and there are automatic RST parsers for two  of  them  (for  English:  Marcu,  2000;  for Portuguese: Pardo et al., 2008) or automatic RST segmenters  (for  English:  Tofiloski  et  al.,  2009). Scientific community working on RST applied to Spanish is very small. For example, Bouayad-Agha et  al.  (2006)  apply  RST  to  text  generation  in several languages, Spanish among them. Da Cunha et al. (2007) develop a summarization system for medical texts in Spanish based on RST. Da Cunha and Iruskieta (2010) perform a contrastive analysis of  Spanish  and  Basque  texts.  Romera  (2004) analyzes coherence relations by means of RST in spoken  Spanish.  Taboada  (2004)  applies  RST  to analyze the resources used by speakers to elaborate conversations in English and Spanish.  
We  consider  that  it  is  necessary  to  build  a Spanish corpus annotated by means of RST. This corpus should be useful for the development of a rhetorical parser for this language and several other applications  related  to  computational  linguistics, like  those  developed  for  other  languages 

Created with an evaluation copy of Aspose.Words. To discover the full versions of our APIs please visit: https://products.aspose.com/words/

1 http://www.sfu.ca/rst/index.html 

Created with an evaluation copy of Aspose.Words. To discover the full versions of our APIs please visit: https://products.aspose.com/words/

(automatic  translation,  automatic  summarization, IE, etc.). And that is what we pretend to achieve with our work. We present the development of the RST  Spanish  Treebank,  the  first  Spanish  corpus annotated by means of RST. 
In  Section  2,  we  present  the  state  of  the  art about  RST  annotated  corpora.  In  Section  3,  we explain  the  characteristics  of  the  RST  Spanish Treebank.  In  Section  4,  we  show  the  search interface  we  have  developed.  In  Section  5,  we establish some conclusions and future work. 
2  State of the Art 
The most known RST corpus is the RST Discourse Treebank,  for  English  (Carlson  et  al.,  2002a, 2002b).  It  includes  385  texts  of  the  journalistic domain,  extracted  from  the  Penn  Treebank (Marcus  et  al.,  1993),  such  as  cultural  reviews, editorials, economy articles, etc. 347 texts are used as a learning corpus and 38 texts are used as a test corpus.  It  contains  176,389  words  and  21,789 EDUs.  13.8%  of  the  texts  (that  is,  53)  were annotated by two people with a list of 78 relations. For  annotation,  the  annotation  tool  RSTtool  http://www.wagsoft.com/RSTTool/ 
 (O'Donnell,  2000)  was  used,  with  some adaptations.  The  principal  advantages  of  this corpus stand on the high number of annotated texts (for the moment it is the biggest RST corpus) and the clarity of the annotation method (specified in the  annotation  manual  by  Carlson  and  Marcu, 2001).  However,  some  drawbacks  remain.  The corpus  is  not  free,  it  is  not  on-line  and  it  only includes texts of one domain (journalistic).  
For  English  there  is  also  the  Discourse Relations  Reference  Corpus  (Taboada  and Renkema,  2008).  This  corpus  includes  65  texts (each one tagged by one annotator) of several types and from several sources: 21 articles from the Wall Street Journal extracted from the RST Discourse Treebank, 30 movies and books’ reviews extracted from  the  epinions.com  website,  and  14  diverse texts,  including  letters,  webs,  magazine  articles, newspaper  editorials,  etc.  The  tool  used  for annotation was also the RSTtool. The advantages of this corpus are that it is free and on-line, and it includes texts of several types and domains. The disadvantages are that the amount of texts is not very  high,  the  annotation  methodology  is  not 
specified and it does not include texts annotated by several people. 
Another  well-known  corpus  is  the  Potsdam Commentary  Corpus,  for  German  (Stede,  2004; Reitter and Stede, 2003). This corpus includes 173 texts  on  politics  from  the  on-line  newspaper Märkische Allgemeine Zeitung. It contains 32,962 words  and  2,195  sentences.  It  is  annotated  with several  data:  morphology,  syntax,  rhetorical structure, connectors, correference and informative structure. Nevertheless, only a part of this corpus (10 texts), which the authors name "core corpus", is  annotated  with  all  this  information.  The  texts were annotated with the RSTtool. This corpus has several  advantages:  it  is  annotated  at  different levels (the annotation of connectors is especially interesting);  all  the  texts  were  annotated  by  two people (with a previous RST training phase); it is free for research purposes, and there is a tool for searching  over  the  corpus  (although  it  is  not available  on-line).  The  disadvantages  are:  the genre and domain of all the texts are the same, the methodology  of  annotation  was  quite  intuitive (without  a  manual  or  specific  criteria)  and  the inter-annotator agreement is not given. 
For  Portuguese,  there  are  2  corpora,  built  in order to develop a rhetorical parser (Pardo et al., 2008). The first one, the CorpusTCC (Pardo et al., 2008), was used as learning corpus for detection of linguistic patterns indicating rhetorical relations. It contains  100  introduction  sections  of  computer science theses (53,000 words and 1,350 sentences). To  annotate  the  corpus  a  list  of  32  rhetorical relations  was  used.  The  annotation  manual  by Carlson  and  Marcu  (2001)  was  adapted  to Portuguese. The annotation tool was the ISI RST Annotation  Tool http://www.isi.edu/~marcu/discourse/
,  an  extension  of  the  RSTtool. The  advantages  of  this  corpus  are:  it  is  free,  it contains an acceptable number of texts and words and it follows a specific annotation methodology. The disadvantage is: it only includes texts of one genre and domain, only annotated by one person. 
The  second  one,  Rhetalho  (Pardo  and  Seno, 2005), was used as reference corpus for the parser evaluation.  It  contains  50  texts:  20  introduction sections and 10 conclusion sections from computer science scientific articles, and 20 texts from the on- line  newspaper  Folha  de  São  Paulo  (7  from  the Daily section, 7 from the World section and 6 from 
the  Science  section).  It  includes  approximately 5,000 words. The relations and the annotation tool are the same as those used in the CorpusTCC. The advantages of this corpus are that it is free, it was annotated by 2 people (they both were RST experts and followed an annotation manual) and it contains texts  of  several  genres  and  domains.  The  main disadvantage is the scarce amount of texts. 
The Penn Discourse Treebank (Rashmi et al., 2008)f  for  English  includes  texts  annotated  with information  related  to  discourse  structure  and semantics (without a specific theoretical approach). Its advantages are: its big size (it contains 40,600 annotated  discourse  relations)  allows  to  apply machine  learning,  and  the  discourse  annotations are  aligned  with  the  syntactic  constituency annotations of the Penn Treebank. Its limitations are: dependencies across relations are not marked, it  only  includes  texts  of  the  journalistic  domain, and  it  is  not  free.  Although  there  are  several corpora annotated with discourse relations, there is not a corpus of this type for Spanish. 
3  The RST Spanish Treebank  
As  Sierra  (2008)  states,  a  corpus  consists  of  a compilation of a set of written and/or spoken texts sharing  some  characteristics,  created  for  certain investigation purposes. According to Hovy (2010), we use 7 core questions in corpus design, detailed in the next subsections. 
3.1 Selecting a Corpus 
For  the  RST  Spanish  Treebank,  we  wanted  to include  short  texts  (finally,  the  average  is  197 words by text; the longest containing 1,051 words and the shortest, 25) in order to get a best on-line visualization of  the  RST  trees.  Moreover,  in  the first  stage  of  the  project,  we  preferred  to  select specialized texts of very different areas, although in  the  future  we  plan  to  include  also  non- specialized  texts  (ex.  blogs,  news,  websites)  in order  to  guarantee  the  representativity  of  the corpus.  We  did  not  find  a  pre-existing  Spanish corpus with these characteristics, so we decided to build our own corpus. Following Cabré (1999), we consider that a text is specialized if it is written by a professional in a given domain. According to this work,  specialized  texts  can  be  divided  in  three levels:  high  (both  the  author  and  the  potential reader  of  the  text  are  specialists),  average  (the 
author of the text is a specialist, and the potential reader  of  that  text  is  a  student  or  someone interested in or possessing some prior knowledge about the subject) and low (the author of the text is a specialist, and the potential reader is the general public).  The  RST  Spanish  Treebank  includes specialized  texts  of  the  three  mentioned  levels: high  (scientific  articles,  conference  proceedings, doctoral theses, etc.), average (textbooks) and low (articles  and  reports  from  popular  magazines, associations’ websites, etc.). The texts have been divided  in  9  domains  (some  of  them  including subdivisions):  Astrophysics,  Earthquake Engineering, Economy, Law, Linguistics (Applied Linguistics,  Language  Acquisition,  PLN, Terminology),  Mathematics  (Primary  Education, Secondary  Education,  Scientific  Articles), Medicine  (Administration  of  Health  Services, Oncology, Orthopedy), Psychology and Sexuality (Clinical Perspective, Psychological Perspective). 
The size of a corpus is also a polemic question. If the corpus is developed for machine learning, its size will be enough when the application we want to  develop  obtains  acceptable  percentages  of precision  and  recall  (in  the  context  of  that application).  Nevertheless,  if  the  corpus  is  built with  descriptive  purposes,  it  is  difficult  to determine the corpus size. In the case of a corpus annotated with rhetorical relations, it is even more difficult,  because  there  are  various  factors involved: EDUs, SPANs (that is, a group of related EDUs),  nuclearity  and  relations.  In  addition, relations are multiple (we use 28). As Hovy (2010: 13) mentions, one of the most difficult phenomena to annotate is the discourse structure. Our corpus contains  52,746  words  and  267  texts.  Table  1 includes RST Spanish Treebank statistics in terms of texts, words, sentences and EDUs. 
 

Texts 
Words 
Sentences 
EDUs 
Learning corpus 
183 
41,555 
1,759 
2,655 
Test corpus  
84 
11,191 
497 
694 
Total corpus  
267 
52,746 
2,256 
3,349 
Table 1: RST Spanish Treebank statistics 
To  increase  the  linear  performance  of  a statistical method, it is necessary that the training corpus  size  grows  exponentially  (Zhao  et  al., 2010). However, the RST Spanish Treebank is not designed only to use statistical methods; we think it  will  be  useful  to  employ  symbolic  or  hybrid 

Created with an evaluation copy of Aspose.Words. To discover the full versions of our APIs please visit: https://products.aspose.com/words/
6

algorithms  (combining  symbolic  and  statistical methods). Moreover, this corpus will be dynamic, so we expect to have a bigger corpus in the future, useful to apply machine learning methods. 
If we measure the corpus size in terms of words or texts, we can take as a reference the other RST corpora. Nevertheless, as Sierra states (2008), it is “absurd”  to  try  to  build  an  exhaustive  corpus covering  all  the  aspects  of  a  language.  On  the contrary,  the  linguist  looks  for  the representativeness  of  the  texts,  that  is,  tries  to create a sample of the studied language, selecting examples which represent the linguistic reality, in order to analyze them in a pertinent way. In this sense and in the frame of this work, we consider that the size will be adequate if the rhetorical trees of the corpus include a representative number of examples  of  rhetorical  relations,  at  least  20 examples of each one (taking into account that the corpus  contains  3115  relations,  we  consider  that this quantity is acceptable; however, we expect to have even more examples when the corpus grows).  Table  2  shows  the  number  of  examples  of  each relation currently included into  the RST  Spanish Treebank  (N-S:  nucleus-satellite  relation;  N-N: multinuclear  relation).  As  it  can  be  observed,  it contains more than 20 examples of most  of the  relations. The exceptions are the nucleus-satellite relations  of  Enablement,  Evaluation,  Summary,  Otherwise  and   Unless,  and  the  multinuclear relations of Conjunction and Disjunction, because it is not so usual to find these rhetorical relations in the  language,  in  comparison  with  others.  Hovy (2010: 128) states that, given the lack of examples in the corpus, there are 2 possible strategies: a) to leave the corpus as it is, with few or no examples of some cases (but the problem will be the lack of training examples for machine learning systems), or b) to add low-frequency examples artificially to “enrich” the corpus (but the problem will be the distortion of the native frequency distribution and perhaps  the  confusion  of  machine  learning systems).  In  the  current  state  of  our  project,  we have  chosen  the  first  option.  We  think  that, including specialized texts in a second stage, we will  get  more  examples  of  these  less  common relations.  If  we  carry  out  a  more  granulated segmentation  maybe  we  could  obtain  more examples;  however,  we  wanted  to  employ  the segmentation criteria used to develop the Spanish RST discourse segmenter (da Cunha et al., 2011). 
 
Relation 
Type 
Quantity 
Nº 
% 
Elaboration 
N-S 
765 
24.56 
Preparation 
N-S 
475 
15.25 
Background 
N-S 
204 
6.55 
Result 
N-S 
193 
6.20 
Means 
N-S 
175 
5.62 
List 
N-N 
172 
5.52 
Joint 
N-N 
160 
5.14 
Circumstance 
N-S 
140 
4.49 
Purpose 
N-S 
122 
3.92 
Interpretation 
N-S 
88 
2.83 
Antithesis 
N-S 
80 
2.57 
Cause 
N-S 
77 
2.47 
Sequency 
N-N 
74 
 2.38 
Evidence 
N-S 
59 
1.89 
Contrast 
N-N 
58 
1.86 
Condition 
N-S 
53 
1.70 
Concession 
N-S 
50 
1.61 
Justification 
N-S 
39 
1.25 
Solution 
N-S 
32 
1.03 
Motivation 
N-S 
28 
0.90 
Reformulation 
N-S 
22 
0.71 
Otherwise 
N-S 
3 
0.10 
Conjunction 
N-N 
11 
0.35 
Evaluation 
N-S 
11 
0.35 
Disjunction 
N-N 
9 
0.29 
Summary 
N-S 
8 
0.26 
Enablement  
N-S 
This document was truncated here because it was created in the Evaluation Mode.
Created with an evaluation copy of Aspose.Words. To discover the full versions of our APIs please visit: https://products.aspose.com/words/
7
