Nom du Fichier :

mikheev J02-3002

Titre:

Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.

Auteurs :

Andrei Mikheev ∗University of EdinburghIn this article we present an approach for tackling three important aspects of text normaliza- tion: sentence boundary disambiguation, disambiguation of capitalized words in positions where capitalization is expected, and identi cation of abbreviations. As opposed to the two dominant techniques of computing statistics or writing specialized grammars, our document-centered ap- proachworksbyconsideringsuggestivelocalcontextsandrepetitionsofindividualwordswithin adocument.Thisapproachprovedtoberobusttodomainshiftsandnewlexicaandproducedper- formance on the level with the highest reported results. When incorporated into a part-of-speech tagger, it helped reduce the error rate signi cantly on capitalized words and sentence boundaries. We also investigated the portability to other languages and obtained encouraging results.1. IntroductionDisambiguation of sentence boundaries and normalization of capitalized words, as well as identi cation of abbreviations, however small in comparison to other tasks of text processing, are of primary importance in the developing of practical text- processing applications. These tasks are usually performed before actual intelligent text processing starts, and errors made at this stage are very likely to cause more errors at later stages and are therefore very dangerous.Disambiguation of capitalized words in mixed-case texts has received little atten- tion in the natural language processing and information retrieval communities, but in fact it plays an important role in many tasks. In mixed-case texts capitalized words usually denote proper names (names of organizations, locations, people, artifacts, etc.), but there are special positions in the text where capitalization is expected. Such manda- tory positions include the rst word in a sentence, words in titles with all signi cant words capitalized or table entries, a capitalized word after a colon or open quote, and the rst word in a list entry, among others. Capitalized words in these and some other positions present a case of ambiguity: they can stand for proper names, as in White later said ... , or they can be just capitalized common words, as in White elephants are ... . The disambiguation of capitalized words in ambiguous positions leads to the identi cation of proper names (or their derivatives), and in this article we will use these two terms and the term case normalization interchangeably.Church (1995, p. 294) studied, among other simple text normalization techniques,   the effect of case normalization for different words and showed that sometimes case      variants refer to the same thing (hurricane and Hurricane), sometimes they refer to different things (continental and Continental) and sometimes they don t refer to muchof anything (e.g., anytime and Anytime).  Obviously these differences arise because some capitalized words stand for proper names (such as Continental, the name of an airline) and some do not.∗Institute for Communicating and Collaborative Systems, Division of Informatics, 2 Buccleuch Place,Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK. E-mail: mikheev@cogsci.ed.ac.uk c 2002 Association for Computational Linguistics

Abstract :

